.. SPDX-License-Identifier: BSD-2-Clause
   Copyright (c) 2013-2025, John McNamara, jmcnamara@cpan.org

.. _ex_sensitivity_label:

Example: Setting the Sensitivity Label for a Document
=====================================================

This program is an example of adding a Sensitivity Label to an XlsxWriter file. See the
:func:`set_custom_property` workbook method for more details.

Sensitivity Labels are a property that can be added to an Office 365 document to
indicate that it is compliant with a company's information protection policies.
Sensitivity Labels have designations like "Confidential", "Internal use only",
or "Public" depending on the policies implemented by the company. They are
generally only enabled for enterprise versions of Office.

See the following Microsoft documentation on how to `Apply sensitivity labels to
your files and email
<https://support.microsoft.com/en-us/office/apply-sensitivity-labels-to-your-files-and-email-2f96e7cd-d5a4-403b-8bd7-4cc636bae0f9>`_.

Sensitivity Labels are generally stored as custom document properties so they
can be enabled using ``set_custom_property()``. However, since the metadata
differs from company to company you will need to extract some of the required
metadata from sample files.

The first step is to create a new file in Excel and set a non-encrypted
sensitivity label. Then unzip the file by changing the extension from `.xlsx` to
`.zip` or by using a command line utility like this:

.. code-block:: bash

  $ unzip myfile.xlsx -d myfile
  Archive:  myfile.xlsx
    inflating: myfile/[Content_Types].xml
    inflating: myfile/docProps/app.xml
    inflating: myfile/docProps/custom.xml
    inflating: myfile/docProps/core.xml
    inflating: myfile/_rels/.rels
    inflating: myfile/xl/workbook.xml
    inflating: myfile/xl/worksheets/sheet1.xml
    inflating: myfile/xl/styles.xml
    inflating: myfile/xl/theme/theme1.xml
    inflating: myfile/xl/_rels/workbook.xml.rels


Then examine the ``docProps/custom.xml`` file from the unzipped xlsx file. The
file doesn't contain newlines so it is best to view it in an editor that can
handle XML or use a commandline utility like libxmlâ€™s `xmllint`_ to format the
XML for clarity:

.. _xmllint: https://gnome.pages.gitlab.gnome.org/libxml2/xmllint.html

.. code-block:: xml

  $ xmllint --format myfile/docProps/custom.xml
  <?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8" standalone="yes"?>
  <Properties
      xmlns="http://schemas.openxmlformats.org/officeDocument/2006/custom-properties"
      xmlns:vt="http://schemas.openxmlformats.org/officeDocument/2006/docPropsVTypes">
    <property fmtid="{D5CDD505-2E9C-101B-9397-08002B2CF9AE}"
              pid="2"
              name="MSIP_Label_2096f6a2-d2f7-48be-b329-b73aaa526e5d_Enabled">
      <vt:lpwstr>true</vt:lpwstr>
    </property>
    <property fmtid="{D5CDD505-2E9C-101B-9397-08002B2CF9AE}"
              pid="3"
              name="MSIP_Label_2096f6a2-d2f7-48be-b329-b73aaa526e5d_SetDate">
      <vt:lpwstr>2024-01-01T12:00:00Z</vt:lpwstr>
    </property>
    <property fmtid="{D5CDD505-2E9C-101B-9397-08002B2CF9AE}"
              pid="4"
              name="MSIP_Label_2096f6a2-d2f7-48be-b329-b73aaa526e5d_Method">
      <vt:lpwstr>Privileged</vt:lpwstr>
    </property>
    <property fmtid="{D5CDD505-2E9C-101B-9397-08002B2CF9AE}"
              pid="5"
              name="MSIP_Label_2096f6a2-d2f7-48be-b329-b73aaa526e5d_Name">
      <vt:lpwstr>Confidential</vt:lpwstr>
    </property>
    <property fmtid="{D5CDD505-2E9C-101B-9397-08002B2CF9AE}"
              pid="6"
              name="MSIP_Label_2096f6a2-d2f7-48be-b329-b73aaa526e5d_SiteId">
      <vt:lpwstr>cb46c030-1825-4e81-a295-151c039dbf02</vt:lpwstr>
    </property>
    <property fmtid="{D5CDD505-2E9C-101B-9397-08002B2CF9AE}"
              pid="7"
              name="MSIP_Label_2096f6a2-d2f7-48be-b329-b73aaa526e5d_ActionId">
      <vt:lpwstr>88124cf5-1340-457d-90e1-0000a9427c99</vt:lpwstr>
    </property>
    <property fmtid="{D5CDD505-2E9C-101B-9397-08002B2CF9AE}"
              pid="8"
              name="MSIP_Label_2096f6a2-d2f7-48be-b329-b73aaa526e5d_ContentBits">
      <vt:lpwstr>2</vt:lpwstr>
    </property>
  </Properties>

The MSIP (Microsoft Information Protection) labels in the ``name`` attributes
contain a GUID that is unique to each company. The "SiteId" field will also be
unique to your company/location. The meaning of each of these fields is
explained in the the following Microsoft document on `Microsoft Information
Protection SDK - Metadata
<https://learn.microsoft.com/en-us/information-protection/develop/concept-mip-metadata>`_.

Once you have identified the necessary metadata you can add it to a new document
as shown below.

Note, some sensitivity labels require that the document is encrypted. In order
to extract the required metadata you will need to unencrypt the file which may
remove the sensitivity label. In that case you may need to use a third party
tool such as `msoffice-crypt`_.

.. _msoffice-crypt: https://github.com/herumi/msoffice



.. literalinclude:: ../../../examples/sensitivity_label.py

