dev/docs/source/working_with_cell_comments.rst, before:

.. _cell_comments:

Working with Cell Comments
==========================

Cell comments are a way of adding notation to cells in Excel. For example::

    worksheet.write('A1', 'Hello')
    worksheet.write_comment('A1', 'This is a comment')

.. image:: _images/comments1.png


Setting Comment Properties
--------------------------

The properties of the cell comment can be modified by passing an optional
dictionary of key/value pairs to control the format of the comment. For
example::

    worksheet.write_comment('C3', 'Hello', {'x_scale': 1.2, 'y_scale': 0.8})

The following options are available::

    author
    visible
    x_scale
    width
    y_scale
    height
    color
    start_cell
    start_row
    start_col
    x_offset
    y_offset

The options are explained in detail below:

* ``author``: This option is used to indicate who is the author of the cell
  comment. Excel displays the author of the comment in the status bar at the
  bottom of the worksheet. This is usually of interest in corporate
  environments where several people might review and provide comments to a
  workbook::

    worksheet.write_comment('C3', 'Atonement', {'author': 'Ian McEwan'})

  The default author for all cell comments in a worksheet can be set using
  the :func:`set_comments_author` method::

     worksheet.set_comments_author('John Smith')

* ``visible``: This option is used to make a cell comment visible when the
  worksheet is opened. The default behavior in Excel is that comments are
  initially hidden. However, it is also possible in Excel to make individual
  comments or all comments visible. In XlsxWriter individual comments can be
  made visible as follows::

    worksheet.write_comment('C3', 'Hello', {'visible': True})

  It is possible to make all comments in a worksheet visible using the
  :func:`show_comments()` worksheet method. Alternatively, if all of the cell
  comments have been made visible you can hide individual comments::

    worksheet.write_comment('C3', 'Hello', {'visible': False})

* ``x_scale``: This option is used to set the width of the cell comment box
  as a factor of the default width::

    worksheet.write_comment('C3', 'Hello', {'x_scale': 2  })
    worksheet.write_comment('C4', 'Hello', {'x_scale': 4.2})

* ``width``: This option is used to set the width of the cell comment box
  explicitly in pixels::

    worksheet.write_comment('C3', 'Hello', {'width': 200})

* ``y_scale``: This option is used to set the height of the cell comment box
  as a factor of the default height::

    worksheet.write_comment('C3', 'Hello', {'y_scale': 2  })
    worksheet.write_comment('C4', 'Hello', {'y_scale': 4.2})

* ``height``: This option is used to set the height of the cell comment box
  explicitly in pixels::

    worksheet.write_comment('C3', 'Hello', {'height': 200})

* ``color``: This option is used to set the background color of cell comment
  box. You can use one of the named colors recognized by XlsxWriter or a Html
  color. See :ref:`colors`::

    worksheet.write_comment('C3', 'Hello', {'color': 'green'  })
    worksheet.write_comment('C4', 'Hello', {'color': '#CCFFCC'})

* ``start_cell``: This option is used to set the cell in which the comment
  will appear. By default Excel displays comments one cell to the right and
  one cell above the cell to which the comment relates. However, you can
  change this behavior if you wish. In the following example the comment
  which would appear by default in cell ``D2`` is moved to ``E2``::

    worksheet.write_comment('C3', 'Hello', {'start_cell': 'E2'})

* ``start_row``: This option is used to set the row in which the comment will
  appear. See the ``start_cell`` option above. The row is zero indexed::

    worksheet.write_comment('C3', 'Hello', {'start_row': 0})

* ``start_col``: This option is used to set the column in which the comment
  will appear. See the ``start_cell`` option above. The column is zero
  indexed::

    worksheet.write_comment('C3', 'Hello', {'start_col': 4})

* ``x_offset``: This option is used to change the x offset, in pixels, of a
  comment within a cell::

    worksheet.write_comment('C3', comment, {'x_offset': 30})

* ``y_offset``: This option is used to change the y offset, in pixels, of a
  comment within a cell::

    worksheet.write_comment('C3', comment, {'y_offset': 30})


You can apply as many of these options as you require. For a working example of
these options in use see :ref:`ex_comments2`.

.. Note::
   Excel only displays offset cell comments when they are displayed as
   ``visible``. Excel does **not** display hidden cells as displaced
   when you mouse over them. Please note this when using options that adjust
   the position of the cell comment such as ``start_cell``, ``start_row``,
   ``start_col``, ``x_offset`` and ``y_offset``.

.. Note::
   **Row height and comments**. If you specify the height of a row that
   contains a comment then XlsxWriter will adjust the height of the comment
   to maintain the default or user specified dimensions. However, the height
   of a row can also be adjusted automatically by Excel if the text wrap
   property is set or large fonts are used in the cell. This means that
   the height of the row is unknown to the module at run time and thus
   the comment box is stretched with the row. Use the ``set_row()`` method
   to specify the row height explicitly and avoid this problem. See example 8
   of :ref:`ex_comments2`.

Commit message:

Add docs for comment font options.
Issue #201

dev/docs/source/working_with_cell_comments.rst, after:

.. _cell_comments:

Working with Cell Comments
==========================

Cell comments are a way of adding notation to cells in Excel. For example::

    worksheet.write('A1', 'Hello')
    worksheet.write_comment('A1', 'This is a comment')

.. image:: _images/comments1.png


Setting Comment Properties
--------------------------

The properties of the cell comment can be modified by passing an optional
dictionary of key/value pairs to control the format of the comment. For
example::

    worksheet.write_comment('C3', 'Hello', {'x_scale': 1.2, 'y_scale': 0.8})

The following options are available::

    author
    visible
    x_scale
    width
    y_scale
    height
    color
    font_name
    font_size
    start_cell
    start_row
    start_col
    x_offset
    y_offset

The options are explained in detail below:

* ``author``: This option is used to indicate who is the author of the cell
  comment. Excel displays the author of the comment in the status bar at the
  bottom of the worksheet. This is usually of interest in corporate
  environments where several people might review and provide comments to a
  workbook::

    worksheet.write_comment('C3', 'Atonement', {'author': 'Ian McEwan'})

  The default author for all cell comments in a worksheet can be set using
  the :func:`set_comments_author` method::

     worksheet.set_comments_author('John Smith')

* ``visible``: This option is used to make a cell comment visible when the
  worksheet is opened. The default behavior in Excel is that comments are
  initially hidden. However, it is also possible in Excel to make individual
  comments or all comments visible. In XlsxWriter individual comments can be
  made visible as follows::

    worksheet.write_comment('C3', 'Hello', {'visible': True})

  It is possible to make all comments in a worksheet visible using the
  :func:`show_comments()` worksheet method. Alternatively, if all of the cell
  comments have been made visible you can hide individual comments::

    worksheet.write_comment('C3', 'Hello', {'visible': False})

* ``x_scale``: This option is used to set the width of the cell comment box
  as a factor of the default width::

    worksheet.write_comment('C3', 'Hello', {'x_scale': 2  })
    worksheet.write_comment('C4', 'Hello', {'x_scale': 4.2})

* ``width``: This option is used to set the width of the cell comment box
  explicitly in pixels::

    worksheet.write_comment('C3', 'Hello', {'width': 200})

* ``y_scale``: This option is used to set the height of the cell comment box
  as a factor of the default height::

    worksheet.write_comment('C3', 'Hello', {'y_scale': 2  })
    worksheet.write_comment('C4', 'Hello', {'y_scale': 4.2})

* ``height``: This option is used to set the height of the cell comment box
  explicitly in pixels::

    worksheet.write_comment('C3', 'Hello', {'height': 200})

* ``color``: This option is used to set the background color of cell comment
  box. You can use one of the named colors recognized by XlsxWriter or a Html
  color. See :ref:`colors`::

    worksheet.write_comment('C3', 'Hello', {'color': 'green'  })
    worksheet.write_comment('C4', 'Hello', {'color': '#CCFFCC'})

* ``font_name``: This option is used to set the font for the comment::

    worksheet.write_comment('C3', 'Hello', {'font_name': 'Courier'})

  The default font is 'Tahoma'.

* ``font_size``: This option is used to set the font size for the comment::

    worksheet.write_comment('C3', 'Hello', {'font_size': 10})

  The  default font size is 8.

* ``start_cell``: This option is used to set the cell in which the comment
  will appear. By default Excel displays comments one cell to the right and
  one cell above the cell to which the comment relates. However, you can
  change this behavior if you wish. In the following example the comment
  which would appear by default in cell ``D2`` is moved to ``E2``::

    worksheet.write_comment('C3', 'Hello', {'start_cell': 'E2'})

* ``start_row``: This option is used to set the row in which the comment will
  appear. See the ``start_cell`` option above. The row is zero indexed::

    worksheet.write_comment('C3', 'Hello', {'start_row': 0})

* ``start_col``: This option is used to set the column in which the comment
  will appear. See the ``start_cell`` option above. The column is zero
  indexed::

    worksheet.write_comment('C3', 'Hello', {'start_col': 4})

* ``x_offset``: This option is used to change the x offset, in pixels, of a
  comment within a cell::

    worksheet.write_comment('C3', comment, {'x_offset': 30})

* ``y_offset``: This option is used to change the y offset, in pixels, of a
  comment within a cell::

    worksheet.write_comment('C3', comment, {'y_offset': 30})


You can apply as many of these options as you require. For a working example of
these options in use see :ref:`ex_comments2`.

.. Note::
   Excel only displays offset cell comments when they are displayed as
   ``visible``. Excel does **not** display hidden cells as displaced
   when you mouse over them. Please note this when using options that adjust
   the position of the cell comment such as ``start_cell``, ``start_row``,
   ``start_col``, ``x_offset`` and ``y_offset``.

.. Note::
   **Row height and comments**. If you specify the height of a row that
   contains a comment then XlsxWriter will adjust the height of the comment
   to maintain the default or user specified dimensions. However, the height
   of a row can also be adjusted automatically by Excel if the text wrap
   property is set or large fonts are used in the cell. This means that
   the height of the row is unknown to the module at run time and thus
   the comment box is stretched with the row. Use the ``set_row()`` method
   to specify the row height explicitly and avoid this problem. See example 8
   of :ref:`ex_comments2`.
