dev/docs/source/working_with_dates_and_time.rst, before:

.. _working_with_dates_and_time:

Working with Dates and Time
===========================

Dates and times in Excel are represented by real numbers, for example "Jan 1
2013 12:00 PM" is represented by the number 41275.5.

The integer part of the number stores the number of days since the epoch and
the fractional part stores the percentage of the day.

A date or time in Excel is just like any other number. To display the number as
a date you must apply an Excel number format to it. Here are some examples:

.. code-block:: python

    import xlsxwriter
    
    workbook = xlsxwriter.Workbook('date_examples.xlsx')
    worksheet = workbook.add_worksheet()

    # Widen column A for extra visibility.
    worksheet.set_column('A:A', 30)

    # A number to convert to a date.
    number = 41333.5

    # Write it as a number without formatting.
    worksheet.write('A1', number)                # 41333.5

    format2 = workbook.add_format({'num_format': 'dd/mm/yy'})
    worksheet.write('A2', number, format2)       # 28/02/13

    format3 = workbook.add_format({'num_format': 'mm/dd/yy'})
    worksheet.write('A3', number, format3)       # 02/28/13

    format4 = workbook.add_format({'num_format': 'd-m-yyyy'})
    worksheet.write('A4', number, format4)       # 28-2-2013

    format5 = workbook.add_format({'num_format': 'dd/mm/yy hh:mm'})
    worksheet.write('A5', number, format5)       # 28/02/13 12:00

    format6 = workbook.add_format({'num_format': 'd mmm yyyy'})
    worksheet.write('A6', number, format6)       # 28 Feb 2013

    format7 = workbook.add_format({'num_format': 'mmm d yyyy hh:mm AM/PM'})
    worksheet.write('A7', number, format7)       # Feb 28 2008 12:00 PM

    workbook.close()

.. image:: _images/working_with_dates_and_times01.png

To make working with dates and times a little easier the XlsxWriter module
provides a :func:`write_datetime` method to write dates in standard library
:mod:`datetime` format.

Specifically it supports datetime objects of type :class:`datetime.datetime`, 
:class:`datetime.date` and :class:`datetime.time`. 

There are many way to create datetime objects, for example the 
:meth:`datetime.datetime.strptime` method::

    date_time = datetime.datetime.strptime('2013-01-23', '%Y-%m-%d')

See the :mod:`datetime` documentation for other date/time creation methods.

As explained above you also need to create and apply a number format to format
the date/time::

    date_format = workbook.add_format({'num_format': 'd mmmm yyyy'})
    worksheet.write_datetime('A1', date_time, date_format)

    # Displays "23 January 2013"

Here is a longer example that displays the same date in a several different
formats:

.. code-block:: python

    from datetime import datetime
    import xlsxwriter
    
    # Create a workbook and add a worksheet.
    workbook = xlsxwriter.Workbook('datetimes.xlsx')
    worksheet = workbook.add_worksheet()
    bold = workbook.add_format({'bold': True})
    
    # Expand the first columns so that the date is visible.
    worksheet.set_column('A:B', 30)
    
    # Write the column headers.
    worksheet.write('A1', 'Formatted date', bold)
    worksheet.write('B1', 'Format', bold)
    
    # Create a datetime object to use in the examples.
    
    date_time = datetime.strptime('2013-01-23 12:30:05.123',
                                  '%Y-%m-%d %H:%M:%S.%f')
    
    # Examples date and time formats.
    date_formats = (
        'dd/mm/yy',
        'mm/dd/yy',
        'dd m yy',
        'd mm yy',
        'd mmm yy',
        'd mmmm yy',
        'd mmmm yyy',
        'd mmmm yyyy',
        'dd/mm/yy hh:mm',
        'dd/mm/yy hh:mm:ss',
        'dd/mm/yy hh:mm:ss.000',
        'hh:mm',
        'hh:mm:ss',
        'hh:mm:ss.000',
    )
    
    # Start from first row after headers.
    row = 1
    
    # Write the same date and time using each of the above formats.
    for date_format_str in date_formats:
    
        # Create a format for the date or time.
        date_format = workbook.add_format({'num_format': date_format_str,
                                          'align': 'left'})
    
        # Write the same date using different formats.
        worksheet.write_datetime(row, 0, date_time, date_format)
    
        # Also write the format string for comparison.
        worksheet.write_string(row, 1, date_format_str)
    
        row += 1


.. image:: _images/working_with_dates_and_times02.png

Commit message:

Added constructor option for adding default date format. Issue #5

dev/docs/source/working_with_dates_and_time.rst, after:

.. _working_with_dates_and_time:

Working with Dates and Time
===========================

Dates and times in Excel are represented by real numbers, for example "Jan 1
2013 12:00 PM" is represented by the number 41275.5.

The integer part of the number stores the number of days since the epoch and
the fractional part stores the percentage of the day.

A date or time in Excel is just like any other number. To display the number as
a date you must apply an Excel number format to it. Here are some examples:

.. code-block:: python

    import xlsxwriter
    
    workbook = xlsxwriter.Workbook('date_examples.xlsx')
    worksheet = workbook.add_worksheet()

    # Widen column A for extra visibility.
    worksheet.set_column('A:A', 30)

    # A number to convert to a date.
    number = 41333.5

    # Write it as a number without formatting.
    worksheet.write('A1', number)                # 41333.5

    format2 = workbook.add_format({'num_format': 'dd/mm/yy'})
    worksheet.write('A2', number, format2)       # 28/02/13

    format3 = workbook.add_format({'num_format': 'mm/dd/yy'})
    worksheet.write('A3', number, format3)       # 02/28/13

    format4 = workbook.add_format({'num_format': 'd-m-yyyy'})
    worksheet.write('A4', number, format4)       # 28-2-2013

    format5 = workbook.add_format({'num_format': 'dd/mm/yy hh:mm'})
    worksheet.write('A5', number, format5)       # 28/02/13 12:00

    format6 = workbook.add_format({'num_format': 'd mmm yyyy'})
    worksheet.write('A6', number, format6)       # 28 Feb 2013

    format7 = workbook.add_format({'num_format': 'mmm d yyyy hh:mm AM/PM'})
    worksheet.write('A7', number, format7)       # Feb 28 2008 12:00 PM

    workbook.close()

.. image:: _images/working_with_dates_and_times01.png

To make working with dates and times a little easier the XlsxWriter module
provides a :func:`write_datetime` method to write dates in standard library
:mod:`datetime` format.

Specifically it supports datetime objects of type :class:`datetime.datetime`,
:class:`datetime.date` and :class:`datetime.time`.

There are many way to create datetime objects, for example the
:meth:`datetime.datetime.strptime` method::

    date_time = datetime.datetime.strptime('2013-01-23', '%Y-%m-%d')

See the :mod:`datetime` documentation for other date/time creation methods.

As explained above you also need to create and apply a number format to format
the date/time::

    date_format = workbook.add_format({'num_format': 'd mmmm yyyy'})
    worksheet.write_datetime('A1', date_time, date_format)

    # Displays "23 January 2013"

Here is a longer example that displays the same date in a several different
formats:

.. code-block:: python

    from datetime import datetime
    import xlsxwriter
    
    # Create a workbook and add a worksheet.
    workbook = xlsxwriter.Workbook('datetimes.xlsx')
    worksheet = workbook.add_worksheet()
    bold = workbook.add_format({'bold': True})
    
    # Expand the first columns so that the date is visible.
    worksheet.set_column('A:B', 30)
    
    # Write the column headers.
    worksheet.write('A1', 'Formatted date', bold)
    worksheet.write('B1', 'Format', bold)
    
    # Create a datetime object to use in the examples.
    
    date_time = datetime.strptime('2013-01-23 12:30:05.123',
                                  '%Y-%m-%d %H:%M:%S.%f')
    
    # Examples date and time formats.
    date_formats = (
        'dd/mm/yy',
        'mm/dd/yy',
        'dd m yy',
        'd mm yy',
        'd mmm yy',
        'd mmmm yy',
        'd mmmm yyy',
        'd mmmm yyyy',
        'dd/mm/yy hh:mm',
        'dd/mm/yy hh:mm:ss',
        'dd/mm/yy hh:mm:ss.000',
        'hh:mm',
        'hh:mm:ss',
        'hh:mm:ss.000',
    )
    
    # Start from first row after headers.
    row = 1
    
    # Write the same date and time using each of the above formats.
    for date_format_str in date_formats:
    
        # Create a format for the date or time.
        date_format = workbook.add_format({'num_format': date_format_str,
                                          'align': 'left'})
    
        # Write the same date using different formats.
        worksheet.write_datetime(row, 0, date_time, date_format)
    
        # Also write the format string for comparison.
        worksheet.write_string(row, 1, date_format_str)
    
        row += 1


.. image:: _images/working_with_dates_and_times02.png


Default Date Formatting
-----------------------

In certain circumstances you may wish to apply a default date format when
writing datetime objects, for example, when handling a row of data with
:func:`write_row`.

In these cases it is possible to specify a default date format string using the
:func:`Workbook` constructor ``default_date_format`` option::

    workbook = xlsxwriter.Workbook('datetimes.xlsx', {'default_date_format':
                                                      'dd/mm/yy'})
    worksheet = workbook.add_worksheet()
    date_time = datetime.now()
    worksheet.write_datetime(0, 0, date_time)  # Formatted as 'dd/mm/yy'

    workbook.close()
